USERINITIALS
userinitials
USERINITIALS "JD"
userinitials "JD"
USERINITIALS \* Upper
userinitials \* Upper
USERINITIALS \* Lower
userinitials \* Lower
USERINITIALS \* FirstCap
userinitials \* FirstCap
USERINITIALS \* Caps
userinitials \* Caps
USERINITIALS \* CharFormat
userinitials \* CharFormat
USERINITIALS \* MergeFormat
userinitials \* MergeFormat
USERINITIALS \* MergeFormatInet
userinitials \* MergeFormatInet
USERINITIALS "JD" \* Upper
userinitials "JD" \* Upper
USERINITIALS "JD" \* Lower
userinitials "JD" \* Lower
USERINITIALS "JD" \* FirstCap
userinitials "JD" \* FirstCap
USERINITIALS "JD" \* Caps
userinitials "JD" \* Caps
USERINITIALS "JD" \* CharFormat
userinitials "JD" \* CharFormat
USERINITIALS "JD" \* MergeFormat
userinitials "JD" \* MergeFormat
USERINITIALS "JD" \* MergeFormatInet
userinitials "JD" \* MergeFormatInet
